---
date: 2009-04-05 03:04:48 UTC
layout: post
slug: 233
title: "I bring you: floep"
tags:
  - python
  - floep
  - distributed
  - ssh

---
<p>I've been wanting to get started with python for quite a bit, but to do so I just really needed a useful program to write. Yesterday, I came up with the idea of writing a very simple script allowing me to execute command over ssh on a couple servers in parallel.</p>

<p>I decided to call it 'floep' for unknown reasons. This is pronounced as 'floop'. The code is a bit wonky, but fortunately its just a little under 150 lines. I've made a <a href="http://code.google.com/p/floep/">google code project</a> if you'd like to criticize, judge or mock me. I'm sure this type of app has been done many times before, but nevertheless I'm open to feature requests and what-not.</p>

<p>Example output:</p>

```
$ floep -q date
Sat Apr  4 16:09:26 EDT 2009
Sat Apr  4 16:09:26 EDT 2009
Sat Apr  4 16:09:26 EDT 2009
Sat Apr  4 16:09:39 EDT 2009
Sat Apr  4 16:09:26 EDT 2009
Sat Apr  4 16:09:26 EDT 2009
Sat Apr  4 16:07:49 EDT 2009
Sat Apr  4 16:08:07 EDT 2009
Sat Apr  4 16:09:27 EDT 2009
Sat Apr  4 16:09:26 EDT 2009
Sat Apr  4 16:09:27 EDT 2009
Sat Apr  4 16:09:27 EDT 2009
Sat Apr  4 16:09:27 EDT 2009
Sat Apr  4 16:09:28 EDT 2009
```

<p>The '-q' suppresses the hostname, but I can quickly see this way if all the system clocks are in sync (not!).</p> 

<p>I don't consider myself a bad programmer, but starting with a new language is always difficult. To get the syntax down is easy, but it's much more difficult to write 'good' code. 'Good' code is well-structured, follows standard coding conventions and also uses the correct libraries (in the correct way).</p>

<p>I've been doing PHP for very long, so as a result you get to a point where you actually know most of the built-in functions. It's good for me to start with something entirely new, because I hope this will also teach me how other people might look at my (possibly unfamiliar and confusing) conventions.</p>

<p>It turns out <a href="http://stackoverflow.com/">Stack Overflow</a> is a great tool for getting through this quickly, and I've got some great (and fast!) responses there. For anyone learning a new tool or language, I can highly recommend Stack Overflow</p>
