---
date: 2009-10-13 21:46:47 UTC
layout: post
slug: 255
title: "Comments are back!"
tags:
  - mysql
  - metablogging
  - binlog

---
<p>Thanks to a suggestion from Mohammad Lahlouh, all deleted comments are restored. Thanks!</p>

<p>I was able to do this with the mysql binlog, which is a binary log containing all statements executed on the server. If you face a similar problem, here are the steps to restore the DB:</p>

<ol>
  <li>See if you're actually storing binlogs. For me this happened to be the case, although I never actually payed attention (My friend Jens Meijer is so kind to provide hosting for me). In my case they were stored in /var/log/mysql.</li>
  <li>Grab your latest backup. In my case it was from October 2008.</li>
  <li>Make sure you also create a new backup, just in case this process goes wrong.</li>
  <li>Restore your old back.</li>
  <li>Find the binlog that corresponds to the date of your backup. I did a simple copy of the ~300 binlogs to a different directory.</li>
  <li>Run the binlog through 'mysqlbinlog' and pipe into a new file. I had to append the --database argument, because I wasn't interested in all the other databases. The full command for me was <i>mysqlbinlog mysql-bin.* --database evert2 > commentsbinlog.sql</i></li>.
  <li>Open the new file, and make sure the first queries are correct. Likely there are some updates/inserts/deletes on top of the file that were already part of your last backup.</li>
  <li>Go all the way to the bottom of the file, and remove the offending queries. In my case I had to remove the query that deleted all my comments.</li>
  <li>Apply the sql file to your database: <i>mysql -u root -p evert2 < < commentsbinlog.sql</i></li>
</ol>

<p>It's wise to assure nobody can access the DB while you are doing this. I hope this helps anyone else with this problem.</p>
