---
date: 2009-09-16 00:41:51 UTC
layout: post
slug: 253
title: "Upgrading to Snow Leopard adventures"
tags:
  - leopard
  - os/x
  - snow
  - partitioning
  - upgrade
  - refit

---
<p>I just got my copy of snow leopard in the mail, so I decided to upgrade my laptop. After doing a full backup, I didn't turn out to be as easy as I thought.</p>

<p>The installation process quickly showed a little yellow triangle, indicating I didn't have any startup disks. I quickly remembered I had a dual boot to Ubuntu, and used <a href="http://refit.sourceforge.net/">Refit</a>, which is basically an alternative boot menu, to get into Linux and the likes.</p>

<p>So I looked up the <a href="http://refit.sourceforge.net/doc/c1s3_remove.html">removal instructions</a>, but unfortunately this didn't change the situation. I then read that OS/X will restore the standard EFI loader (if that's the correct terminology), by opening the Disk Utility, and making the partition slightly smaller and bigger again. Trying this I got an odd error, namely "MediaKit reports no such partition". No dice.</p>

<p>So I ended up booting an Ubuntu Live CD, removing the linux ext3 and swap partitions there. After this was done, I was able to resize the main OS/X partition, which eventually fixed the problem.</p>

<p>If you ran into similar problems, I'm hoping there's enough keywords in here for you to find this solution :).</p>

<p>After all that installing Snow Leopard is a bit of an anti-climax. As advertised, not a lot changed, and I've yet to see a noticeable speed difference. The OS is using less disk-space, but 29 euro is still a high price for a glorified 'rm' statement.</p>

<p>I do notice small notification improvements here and there, and Address Book.app now supports CardDAV, which is nice.</p>
