---
title: "I wish JSON5 was more popular"
date: "2023-01-09 21:29:36 UTC"
geo: [43.64793345752491, -79.42044389030917]
location: "Bad Gateway Office"
tags:
  - json
  - yaml
  - json5
  - toml
---

As developers we write a lot of code, but we also deal with a lot of
configuration files.

The three major formats I tend to use day to day are:

* JSON
* YAML
* .env

And, they all kinda suck. JSON feels like it should
_never_ have become a format that people hand-write. So many quotes, and
and configuration files **need comments** to tell users *why* certain decisions
were made. `.env` has a specific purpose (and it's ok at that), but it's not a
great universal format, and YAML has always been difficult to read and write to me.
I can somehow never retain the syntax and end up copy-pasting things from examples.

## Why YAML is difficult for me

A small example from Github workflows/actions:

```yaml
steps:
  - uses: actions/checkout@v2
  - uses: actions/setup-node@v2
    with:
      node-version: 14
      registry-url: https://registry.npmjs.org/
  - run: npm ci
  - run: npm publish
```

I couldn't tell you  why `uses` has a dash in front, and `node-version` does
not. If there's a difference in how a YAML reader outputs them, I'm not sure
how I would be able to retain this while writing YAML.

I also use/love [home assistant][1], which lets you write some pretty cool
automations using YAML. I wanted to play with
this but it's been a barrier I've not been able to overcome. I don't know
if it's me. I'm been working as a programmer for 22 years. I'm decent at it,
but when when I chat with some of my peers (hi mhum!) they did not share my
sentiment.

YAML can also have very [surprising behavior][4], with casting types:

From the [linked article][4], this:

```yaml
- movie:
    title: Blade Runner
    year: 1982
```

becomes:

```yaml
- movie:
    title: 1979
    year: 2016
```

And

```yaml
- country1: ca
- country2: no
```

Becomes:

```yaml
- country1: ca
- country2: false
```

I'm sure there's YAML linters out there that help avoid the pitfalls, but in
my mind configuration files should be simple.

There's some configuration formats I like, such as [TOML][2] and [JSON5][3].
They strike the right balance to me with being easy to read and
write, unambigious, supporting comments, strictness and not being incredibly
hard to write a parser for.

TOML is like ini files on steroids, and JSON5 is JSON but with fewer quotes,
comments and multi-line strings.

I _could_ write my NPM configuration file as `package.json5` and automatically
convert it to `package.json` but that feels too surprising. My projects are
a lready kind of eclectic, so I want the 'plumbing' to be unsurprising. Plus
there's the whole chicken and egg thing with needing a JSON5 parser before we
have dependencies.

I'd love the NPM project to adopt JSON5. It seems like a great fit. JSON and
YAML can't be the final word for human-maintained data formats. It's so
obviously sub-optimal.

If NPM adopted JSON5, I would annotate so much in my `package.json`. I'd
document why a dependency is needed,  why we are stuck using a previous major
version of a dependency and what the purpose is of each script.

I wouldn't know what format would be ideal for Github Actions. Maybe the
answer is 'nothing' and they need a good DSL.

And while we're at it, stop polluting my projects root directory! Can't we
all agree on a `.meta` directory for finding configuration files?

[1]: https://www.home-assistant.io/
[2]: https://toml.io/en/
[3]: https://json5.org/
[4]: https://www.infoworld.com/article/3669238/7-yaml-gotchas-to-avoidand-how-to-avoid-them.html
