---
title: "Ketting 2.5 release."
date: "2019-01-30 17:00:00 UTC"
tags:
  - ketting
  - hateoas
  - rest
  - jsonapi
  - hal
---

[Ketting][1] is an attempt at making a generic Hypermedia API client for
javascript. It uses a 'link' and following links as the most important
primitive.

Last week I released version 2.5.0 on [NPM][2] so maybe it's time to list
some of the improvements since the [last update][3] in order from most to
least interesting.

JSON:API support
----------------

[JSON:API][4] is a standard for making JSON-based APIs, and it has some
support for hypermedia ideas as well.

In particular, the standard has a `links` object, and it also defines
a relationship between collections and members of collections.

This release now ships with a 'representor' for JSON API, which means
you can now do something like this:

```javascript
const myResource = await home
  .follow('next') // This might be a HTML5 document
  .follow('author') // This might be a HAL document
  .follow('about') // This might be a JSON:API document
```

All of these will now be seamless regardless of which format any of these
hops used, only when you `get()` and `put()` the format is relevant again.

A lot of help in getting this right came from JSON:API community members such
as Gabe Sullice and Ethan Resnick. If you're interested in the full discussion
about how JSON:API maps to HATEOAS read [the Github issue][5].

`go()` function
---------------

Not every endpoint will have every appropriate link to another resource.
Sometimes you just have to work with what you have, and fetch a resource
yourself.

The `go()` function is a function that exists on a resource and simply
gives you a new resource based on the url you passed. The url can be relative
and will be resolved based on the 'current' resource.

```javascript
const anotherResource = resource.go('?q=hello');
```

Resource is generic
-------------------

If you use typescript with this package, it might be desirable to have some
typing.

Adding good support for this will be an ongoing process, but as a first step
the `Resource` class is now generic.

This means that you can define a function such as:

```typescript
function foo(): Resource<MyBodyType> {
  // ...
}
```

Typescript will then use `MyBodyType` as the type that will be returned from
`get()` and `refresh()` and will demand that the value passed to `put()` has
this type.

By default this is `any`.

I think this is a decent first step, but I also imagine this will have to
continue to evolve.

esModuleInterop is false
------------------------

The Typescript build now has `esModuleInterop` off. Apparently keeping it
set to `true` caused anyone who uses the library and has this setting set
to `false` to get errors.

So in order to not force people to change this setting, `esModuleInterop` is
now off, which means the library will work regardless of your own preference.


[1]: https://github.com/evert/ketting
[2]: https://www.npmjs.com/package/ketting
[3]: /ketting-2-3/
[4]: https://jsonapi.org/
[5]: https://github.com/evert/ketting/issues/109
