---
title: "Ketting 2.3 release"
date: "2018-10-11 09:00:00 -0700"
tags:
  - http
  - api
  - typescript
  - ketting
  - rest
  - hateoas
location: San Francisco, US 
---

I just released [Ketting 2.3][2], the missing HATEOAS client for Javascript.

I last blogged about this project in [June][1], so I thought it was worth
listing the most interesting recent changes.

Content-Type and Accept header improvements
-------------------------------------------

In the past, the Ketting library used a configurable set of mime-types for the
`Accept` header, and some heuristics for the `Content-Type` headers. This has
been greatly improved.

If you're following links in this format:

```json
{
  "_links": {
    "next": { "href": "/next-hop", "type": "application/vnd.some-vendor+json"}
  }
}
```

```html
<link rel="next" href="/next-hop" type="application/vnd.some-vendor+json" />
```

```http
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Link: </next-hop>; rel="next" type="application/vnd.some-vendor+json"
```

In each of those cases, the link embeds a hint for the content-type at this
new location.

When running the following on a resource, the `GET` request will now
automatically use that value fo the `Accept` header:

```typescript
const resource = "..."; // Pretend this is a Ketting resource.
const nextResource = await resource.follow('next');

console.log(await nextResource.get()); // Will get a application/vnd.some-vendor+json Accept header.
```

Support for OAuth2 `client_credentials` grant
---------------------------------------------

The library supported some OAuth2, specifically:

* Simply supplying a Bearer token.
* Using the `password` grant_type.

Now, the library also supports the `client_credentials` grant. The library now
also detects if no `refresh_token` was given, and will automatically
re-authenticate using the original grant_type, if this was the case.


No longer ships with a `fetch()` polyfill
-----------------------------------------

When using the web-packed file, I noticed that a large part of the size of
the Ketting library was attributable to a polyfill for the [Fetch API][3].

Every modern browser ships the Fetch API, so this no longer seemed needed. If
you do need to run Ketting on an older browser, you can simply provide your own
polyfill, such as the [whatwg-fetch][4] package.


Updating
--------

For well-behaved servers, these changes should not have a negative impact.
Don't forget to test.

To update, this should usually do it:

    npm install ketting@2.3.0

* [Project page][2]

[1]: https://evertpot.com/ketting-2-release/
[2]: https://github.com/evert/ketting
[3]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API
[4]: https://github.com/github/fetch "whatwg-fetch"
