---
date: 2007-10-30 12:27:59 UTC
layout: post
slug: 157
title: "Leopard first impressions and problems"
tags:
  - flash
  - leopard
  - os/x
  - terminal
  - upload
  - background
  - airport
  - spaces

---
<p>I don't want to sound like I'm complaining too much, because I actually really like the new version of os/x. I wanted to cover a bunch of problems so people might know its not just them.</p>

<p>First, my personal favourite improvements.</p>

<h3>The terminal</h3>

<p>I'm especially happy that some time was spent improving the terminal application. Half my day I spend in that application, and any small improvement is welcome there. The most important being tabs (yessss) and an always running ssh-agent (which integrates with the keychain).</p>

<p>I ran across a bunch of problems as well ..</p>

<h3>Flash upload stops working</h3>

<p>Since we deal at <a href="http://www.filemobile.net">FileMobile</a> a lot with uploads of large/huge files.. we use a Flash uploader. It completely stopped working in leopard and from what I hear an update of the flashplayer is in the works.</p>

<h3>Windows magically disappear using spaces</h3>

<p>Spaces is a nice tool and i feel like it could help productivity.. but when you're switching between a few spaces sometimes windows get completely lost and the applications need a restart to re-appear.</p>

<h3>Terminal won't change the background color</h3>

<p>I'm fairly sure this has to do with the fact that I used a background image for my terminal in tiger; which is a feature that has been removed in leopard. I really dislike the default black-on-white, but I couldn't change my background color anymore. The solution for this was to simply remove:</p>

```
Library/Preferences/com.apple.Terminal.plist
```

<p>From my home directory.</p>

<h3>My key-bindings for page-up and page-down are lost in the Terminal.</h3>

<p>I haven't felt like trying this yet, but I assume I simply have to follow <a href="http://evertpot.com/112">my previous steps</a>, if not.. I'll post about it later..</p>

<h3>Airport up and down</h3>

<p>Not sure if this is the OS or the airport, but its been shaky.. Hope this gets improved with an update of some sort.</p>
