---
date: 2007-12-13 08:37:59 UTC
layout: post
slug: 168
title: PHP WebDAV integration library
categories:
  - webdav
  - sabredav

---
<p>I recently started writing a WebDAV integration library for PHP.</p>

<p>WebDAV is a nasty beast for a number of reasons, but its a great tool to integrate your existing web infrastructure with a Desktop filesystem. WebDAV is built into every modern operating system since years, but I think the biggest reason we haven't seen a lot of adoption is because of the difficulties with implementing it.</p>

<p>I intend to make this library as easy as possible to use, without making it a black-box-like system. Focus will not be on everything WebDAV could possibly provide, but instead on the features that are actually supported by the operating systems.</p>

<p>Implementing WebDAV will become as simple as creating an implementation of an abstract 'Directory' and an abstract 'File' class.</p>

<p>I'm kind of debating on the following two questions, perhaps a smart reader can comment on these..</p>

<ol>
  <li>WebDAV supports custom properties, and in order to make the Server fully webdav-compliant, it should support these. I'm going to make this an optional feature, but, should this happen on:<ul>
     <li>A <a href="http://sabredav.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/Sabre/DAV/IFile.php">File level</a> with a custom interface.</a></li>
     <li>Or a global 'Property manager'</li>
    </ul>
      Reason I'm asking, is because while I was working on the <a href="http://sabredav.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/Sabre/DAV/FS/">sample</a> implementation, it will not be easy to attach custom properties to physical files. Perhaps I should go for a combination of both?</li>
  <li>Same question goes for locking of files and directories. Does it make more sense to have a global Lock manager, or should this implemented on a per-file-class basis?</li>
</ol>

<p>The project is up on <a href="http://code.google.com/p/sabredav/">Google Code hosting</a>, and I opened up a <a href="http://groups.google.com/group/sabredav-discuss">discussion group</a> as well. If you feel like helping out, or contributing please drop a line there! I'll be needing people writing docs and tutorials, testers, coders and somebody who has some designing skills (no, it's not just a logo, we're actually going to put down something cool..). If required, you can also <a href="/contact">contact me directly</a>.</p>