---
date: "2018-09-04 13:00:00 +0200"
title: "226 IM Used"
permalink: /http/226-im-used
location: "San Francisco, US"
tags:
   - http
   - http-series
---

[`226 IM Used`][1] is used by a specific extension of the HTTP protocol. The
extension allows a HTTP server to send diffs (changes) of resources to clients.

For example, a client (like a browser) might have a cache for a certain
resource. It also has an `ETag` stored. When a client wants to see if there's
an update, it will include the `ETag` (in an `If-None-Match` header).

If the resource changed server-side, normally the server will just send
the entire new resource back. However, it might be true that a smaller part
of the resource changed, and sending the whole new version back might be a bit
of a waste.

The "Delta Encoding In HTTP" allows a server to only send back the changes, in
the form of some patch or diff format. If the client requested this, and the
server supported it, it will use the `226 IM Used` status to incidate this. If
the server sent back `200 OK`, it knows that the server didn't support the
standard.

Example
-------

This is a client that already has a cached version of a resource and asks for
the latest version:

```http
GET /foo.html HTTP/1.1
Host: bar.example.net
If-None-Match: "123xyz"
A-IM: vcdiff, diffe, gzip
```

The client tells the server that it supports the `vcdiff` and `diffe` format
for patches, and also supports `gzip` compression.

A supporting server might answer this with this response:

```http
HTTP/1.1 226 IM Used
ETag: "489uhw"
IM: vcdiff
Date: Tue, 25 Nov 1997 18:30:05 GMT
Cache-Control: no-store, im, max-age=30

...
```

`IM` stands for `Instance Manipulation`.


Usage
-----

Delta Encoding in HTTP seems like a useful, generic extension of the protocol.
In some ways it's the reverse of the [`PATCH`][2] method, which is also fairly
popular.

It also behaves similar to [HTTP Range Requests][3]. When a client requests a
range, a server will respond with [`206 Partial Content`][4].

However, I've never seen this feature used in the wild, and it's not entirely
clear to me why. A google search for this status only really results in
articles discussing HTTP statuses, but no implementations.

Developers who need a feature like this will likely typically use other
mechanisms instead. For example, I can imagine API's implementing a `?since=`
query parameter to do a similar thing instead.


Notes
-----

I don't know why `IM Used` got `226` as its code. It seems weird that 20
numbers were skipped.


References
----------

* [RFC3229][1] - Delta Encoding in HTTP.

[1]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3229 "Delta Encoding in HTTP"
[2]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5789 "Patch Method for HTTP"
[3]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7233 "Range Requests"
[4]: /http/206-partial-content
