---
date: "2018-11-13 08:00:00 -0700"
title: "400 Bad Request"
permalink: /http/400-bad-request
tags:
   - http
   - http-series
---

[`400 Bad Request`][1] is the first error code. Every status that starts with a
`4` indicates that the client did something wrong. If the status starts with a
`5` it means that the server did something wrong.

`400 Bad Request` is used as a generic error code, and it's useful if a
more-specific error is not a good fit.

There's often a lot of discussion about which `4xx` code is the most appropriate
for any given situations, because there's many and the distinction is not always
super clear. The most important thing to remember when selecting the appropriate
code is: "can a generic client do something with this response?". If the answer
is no, it might not matter as much which error code is returned.

For example, when a client sees a `401` it might know to show a login window.
When a client sees a `403`, it might know to tell the end-user that the reason
their operation failed, was because of permissions-related issues.

Those are good reasons to show an error code, but those reasons don't always
exists. For those cases it's fine to just use the generic status code `400`.


Response bodies
---------------

When returning any error, you should also return a response body with more
information about the failure. If your client is a browser, this might be
user-friendly HTML page. If your client is some kind of JSON-based client, it
might be good idea to use the standard [application/problem+json][2] response
code.


Example
------

```http
HTTP/1.1 400 Bad Request
Content-Type: application/problem+json

{
  "type": "https://example.org/impolite",
  "title": "Request was not polite enough",
  "detail": "HTTP requests must be made using a 'Please' HTTP header.
}
```


References
----------

* [RFC7231, Section 6.5.1][1] - 400 Bad Request
* [RFC7807][2] - Problem details for HTTP APIs
* [How to think about HTTP Status codes][3] - Article by Mark Nottingham.

[1]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7231#section-6.5.1 "400 Bad Request"
[2]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7807 "Problem Details for HTTP APIs"
[3]: https://www.mnot.net/blog/2017/05/11/status_codes
