---
date: "2018-09-25 08:00:00 -0700"
layout: http-series
title: "302 Found"
permalink: /http/302-found
tags:
   - http
   - http-series
---

[`302 Found`][1] is another misunderstood status code. The intent of this
status is to tell the client that the resource they tried to access is
temporarily hosted somewhere else.

Because the change is temporary, the client shouldn't update its own links
to the new location but keep hitting the endpoint that sent the `302` in
case something changed.

The `302` is misused in two ways. Like [`301 Moved Permanently`][2], the
original intent of the specification was if a client hits a url and sees the
`302`, it should repeat the exact same request on the new location.

Browsers don't do this, and tend to convert `POST` requests to `GET`. As a
result, the specifications now state that you no longer can count on clients
to do the same request on the `Location` target, and
[`307 Temporary Redirect`][3] was introduced. `307` _requires_ the client to
do use the same HTTP method.

The 'incorrect' usages is so widespread it makes more sense to consider this
implicitly the 'standard'.

Many HTTP / Web frameworks will actually now default to `302` for redirects
after a `POST` request. The meaning frameworks intent to the client is:

> "The `POST` request succeeded, now redirect the browser to this new location
> to see the result."

It's a valid use-case, but there is actually a different HTTP status that was
specifically intended to fulfill this use-case: [`303 See Other`][4], which is
actually [supported by every browser][5].


References
----------

* [RFC7231, Section 6.4.3][2] - 302 Found

[1]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7231#section-6.4.3 "302 Found"
[2]: /http/301-moved-permanently
[3]: /http/307-temporary-redirect
[4]: /http/303-see-other
[5]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status/303
