---
date: "2018-07-24 08:00:00 -0700"
layout: http-series
title: "103 Early Hints"
permalink: /http/103-early-hints
tags:
   - http
   - http-series
---

[103 Early Hints][1] is an experimental status code. It can be used by a
server to preemptively send headers to a client or intermediary. A client
might be able to use these headers to make certain optimizations as early
as possible in the process.

The specific use-case in [RFC8297][2] is preloading. A server might tell a
browser that it's very likely to require certain css stylesheets or scripts
to render the document using the `Link` header:

```http
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Date: Fri, 26 May 2017 10:02:11 GMT
Content-Length: 1234
Content-Type: text/html; charset=utf-8
Link: </main.css>; rel=preload; as=style
Link: </newstyle.css>; rel=preload; as=style
Link: </script.js>; rel=preload; as=script
```

When a client receives these headers, it might immediately start fetching
those resource in anticipation of the HTML document using them.

The `103 Early Hints` status code can move those headers up even earlier.

A response to a HTTP GET request might then look like this:

```http
HTTP/1.1 103 Early Hints
Link: </style.css>; rel=preload; as=style
Link: </script.js>; rel=preload; as=script
```

```http
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Date: Fri, 26 May 2017 10:02:11 GMT
Content-Length: 1234
Content-Type: text/html; charset=utf-8
Link: </style.css>; rel=preload; as=style
Link: </script.js>; rel=preload; as=script
```

This GET request got 2 responses The `103 Early Hints` status codes
were in this case sent as soon as the server could, while the real response
(with `200 OK`) took a bit longer to produce. This could allow a client to
quickly fetch these additional resources.

Another use-case for this might be a HTTP/2-enabled proxy or CDN. This CDN
might be able to read these `103` responses and turn the `preload` links into
HTTP/2 pushes.

A caveat
--------

Any header sent with the `103` status codes should be treated just as hints,
and might not be 'correct'. Only once you get the final status code, a client
can find out what the real headers should have been.

For that reason any headers supplied in the `103` should not cause any changes
to how the real responses were interpreted.

[1]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8297#section-2 "103 Early Hints"
[2]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8297 "An HTTP Status Code for Indicating Hints"

