---
date: "2018-06-29 08:00:00 -0700"
layout: http-series
title: "102 Processing"
permalink: /http/102-processing
tags:
   - http
   - http-series
---

[`102 Processing`][1] is a pretty rare status code. It's not in the official
newer [HTTP specifications][2], and its only appearance is in an [obsolete
version][3] of the WebDAV specification. It was left out of the [current][4]
WebDAV specification.

When the server sends back the `102 Processing` status code, it basically
informs a client that the full request has been received, the server is
working on it, and that a real status code will be sent back later.

In that sense it's somewhat similar to [`100 Continue`][5]. The difference is
that `100 Continue` might be returned immediately, and `102 Processing` only
after the full request has been received. The suggestion from the specification
is to do this if handing the request is going to take longer than 20 seconds.

One way to look at it, is that it's a mechanism for the server to tell the
client that 'its not dead yet', and it might help avoid timeouts.

Since `102 Processing` is missing from recent HTTP specifications, it's
probably not a good idea to rely on its behavior. If you are implementing
a client, it might still be a good idea to have support for this. My
understanding is that good HTTP clients should ignore any early 1xx status
codes they don't understand.

A full response from a HTTP server using this might look like this:

```
[client sends request headers]
```

```http
HTTP/1.1 100 Continue
```

```
[client sends request body]
```

```http
HTTP/1.1 102 Processing
```

```http
HTTP/1.1 102 Processing
```

```http
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
```

Node.js specifically has built-in support for it via the [writeProcessing()][6].
function.

[1]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2518#section-10.1 "102 Processing"
[2]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7231#section-6.1 "OVerview of Status Codes"
[3]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2518 "Obsoleted WebDAV specification"
[4]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4918 "Current WebDAV specification"
[5]: /http/100-continue
[6]: https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#http_response_writeprocessing
