---
date: "2019-04-30 15:00:00 UTC"
title: "423 Locked"
permalink: /http/423-locked
tags:
   - http
   - http-series
location: New office, Adelaide St W, Toronto, ON, Canada
geo: [43.647767, -79.389963]
---

The [`423 Locked`][1] status-code does not appear in the base
HTTP specification, but is part of [WebDAV specification][4], which is an
extension to HTTP.

A major goal of WebDAV was to provide a 'filesystem over the web'. One of its
core features is for users to 'lock' specific files and directories to prevent
others from editing them.

A user can lock a resource by issuing a http [`LOCK`][2] method and later on
unlock the resource by using the [`UNLOCK`][3] HTTP method.

Both 'shared locks' and 'exclusive locks' are supported.

Example
-------

Locking a resource

```http
LOCK /article/5 HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: application/xml

<?xml version="1.0"?>
<d:lockinfo xmlns:d='DAV:'>
 <d:lockscope><d:exclusive/></d:lockscope>
 <d:locktype><d:write/></d:locktype>
 <d:owner>Evert</d:owner>
</d:lockinfo>
```

A successful response to this includes a Lock-Token header.

```http
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/xml
Lock-Token: <urn:uuid:e71d4fae-5dec-22d6-fea5-00a0c91e6be4>

<?xml version="1.0"?>
...
```

If a user tries to make a change to a locked resource, they will get an error:

```http
PUT /article/5 HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: text/plain

New content
```

```http
HTTP/1.1 423 Locked
Content-Type: application/xml

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<d:error xmlns:d="DAV:">
  <d:lock-token-submitted>
  <d:href>/article/5</d:href>
  </d:lock-token-submitted>
</d:error>
```

Unless, they also include the lock-token in the `If` header:

```http
PUT /article/5 HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: text/plain
If: <urn:uuid:e71d4fae-5dec-22d6-fea5-00a0c91e6be4>

New content
```

```http
HTTP/1.1 204 No Content
```

Usage on the web
----------------

I haven't seen a lot of usage of `LOCK`, `UNLOCK` and the `423` code outside
of WebDAV. However, I don't see strong reasons against their usage.

A big part that the lock functionality
of WebDAV hopes to solve, is avoiding problems with multiple users making
updates on (groups of-) resources at the same time.

If you also have this issue, bear in mind that there is a more popular feature
in HTTP to deal with this: Etags and the `If-Match` / `If-None-Match` headers.

These headers tend to work a bit better, especially if they are required
because they give a strong indicator to an end-user: you are about to overwrite
someone's changes. If ETags solve your concurrency or 'lost update'
use-case, it's likely better.

However, one thing `LOCK` does is that it allows a user to reserve a resource
in advance for editing. It basically can give an indication to other users:
"someone is currently working on this document".

Is that problem solvable without resorting to WebDAV http methods? Probably!
Your REST resources could for example simply expose a `lockedBy` JSON property.
When set, it could prevent only that user to make changes.


References
----------

* [RFC4918, Section 11.3][1] - 423 Locked
* [RFC4918, Section 9.10][2] - LOCK method
* [RFC4918, Section 9.11][3] - UNLOCK method

See also:

* [412 Precondition Failed][5].
* [WebDAV features that might be useful for HTTP services][6].

[1]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4918#section-11.3 "423 Locked"
[2]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4918#section-9.10 "LOCK method"
[3]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4918#section-9.11 "UNLOCK method"
[4]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4918 "WebDAV specification" 
[5]: /http/412-precondition-failed
[6]: /webdav-features-for-http/
