---
date: "2019-06-11 15:00:00 UTC"
title: "430 Would Block"
permalink: /http/430-would-block
tags:
   - http
   - http-series
location: Adelaide St W, Toronto, ON, Canada
geo: [43.647767, -79.389963]
---

If you look at lists of HTTP status-codes, you might notice that there's a gap
between [`429 Too Many Requests`][2] and [`431 Request Header Fields Too Large`][3].

I find this interesting, so I did some digging and it turns out that around the
same time `429` and `431` there was another status code that never made it into
a standard, defining [`430 Would Block`][1].

The draft specification has a few solutions to make HTTP/1.1 pipelining features
usable. HTTP/1.1 pipelining is a feature that allows a browser to send multiple
requests over a single TCP connection before having to wait for the response.

This potentially could be a major optimization, but adoption has been
problematic. Since then HTTP/2 was introduces which solves this entirely.
Pipelining support did exist in a number of clients and servers, but was often
behind a flag that was disabled by default. Since HTTP/2 various clients such
as Curl have [removed HTTP/1.1 pipelining support entirely][4], and it's
unlikely this feature will ever come back.

The `430 Would Block` status code was a code that a server could use to prevent
pipelining multiple requests, for which one of the requests would block
subsequent ones later in the pipeline.

Anyway, I wrote this mostly for historical interest sake. Don't use this.

References
----------

* [draft-nottingham-http-pipeline-01][1] - Making HTTP Pipelining Usable on
  the Open Web

[1]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-nottingham-http-pipeline-01
[2]: /http/429-too-many-requests
[3]: /http/431-request-header-fields-too-large
[4]: https://daniel.haxx.se/blog/2019/04/06/curl-says-bye-bye-to-pipelining/
