---
title: "no-cors misconceptions"
date: "2020-03-17 15:00:00 UTC"
tags:
  - http
  - nocors
  - fetch
  - cors
---

Between tasks I spend a fair time on Stack Overflow, which is (truth be told)
a love/hate relationship.

There's a few recurring problems popping up from time to time that I feel make
a longer explanation. Last time, I wrote about [how to use MySQL in Node.js][1],
but today I wanted to write about the [fetch][2] `no-cors` setting.

What is CORS?
-------------

Browsers have a 'sandbox'. This sandbox prevents a script on some domain to do
things on other domains.

For example, if a script runs on `domain1.example.com`, it is not allowed to do
a `PUT` request on `domain2.example.org`.

For the longest time this was simply the truth, and we needed complicated
workarounds to deal with this (proxies, flash scripts, iframe messaging).

But then [CORS][3] came along, which offered a better solution. CORS allows
`domain2` to say: "`domain1` is allowed to make requests".

So, this is the first popular misconception: CORS does not add security, it
selectively removes it.

What is `no-cors`?
------------------

If you're trying to `fetch()` from another domain, and this domain does not
opt into CORS, your request will return a network error and some messaging
in the console.

If you don't control the API you are calling, you might be looking for
alternative solutions, and you might run into `no-cors`:

```javascript
const result = await fetch('https://domain2.example.org', {
  method: 'POST',
  mode: 'no-cors',
  headers: {
    'Content-Type': 'application/json',
  },
  body: JSON.stringify({ foo: 'bar' }),
});
```

The property 'no-cors' suggests that you're just turning the CORS check off,
but it has a far greater effect.

Using `no-cors` alters your request and response to make it 'safe' for a
browser to do the request.

These are the main effects:

* Any request header except: `Accept`, `Accept-Language`, `Content-Language`,
  `Content-Type` will be silently stripped from the request.
* If `Content-Type` is something other than `application/x-www-form-urlencoded`,
  `multipart/form-data` or `text/plain`, the header is ignored and set to
  `text/plain`.
* If the HTTP request is anything other than `GET`, `HEAD` or `POST`, you will
  get an error.
* You will not be able to read the response body, status or headers.

In other words, you can fire off a `GET`, `HEAD` or `POST` request, but wont
know if it succeeded, failed, or what the response was, and if you `POST`
you can only really encode the request body as a HTML form, or `text/plain`.

This makes the usefulness of `no-cors` pretty limited to a few cases. In fact,
every case I've seen of people using `no-cors`, it was a mistake.


Why exactly those features? 
---------------------------

Before fetch and XMLHttpRequest, it was already possible to make these
requests with Javascript. The way to do this would be by creating a HTML form,
and calling `.submit()`. With HTML forms it's also not possible for Javascript
to see the response or use custom request bodies.

Because that feature existed before Javascript and before the need of
sandboxing, there was no need for an extra security layer to add this feature
to `fetch()`. The world was already prepared for browsers doing these
requests.

The one exception to this is perhaps `text/plain`, which (as far as I know) was
a newly lifted restriction that was deemed to not be risky.


So how do I fix my problem?
---------------------------

There's 2 main solutions:

1. Add CORS support to the API you are using. This only works if you have
   control over the target.
2. Instead of making the request from your domain, something else needs to
   make the request for you.

If you can't add CORS headers, you will likely want to build a small
server-side script that can make these requests on your behalf.

Instead of calling the target directly, your script can now call your script,
which has to do the request server-side.


[1]: https://evertpot.com/executing-a-mysql-query-in-nodejs/
[2]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API/Using_Fetch 
[3]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CORS
