---
title: "Ketting v6: Using Hypermedia APIs with React"
date: "2020-08-17 05:41:00 UTC"
draft: true
tags:
  - ketting
  - release
  - hypermedia
  - rest
  - http
  - react
  - typescript
  - javascript
  - hateaos
geo: [43.660773, -79.429926]
location: "Bloor St W, Toronto, Canada"
cover_image: https://evertpot.com/assets/cover/torontojs.jpg
---

In the previous year our team has spent a lot of time writing frontends for
Hypermedia-based APIs, predominantly using React.

We've been using our open source client for this: [Ketting][1]. Ketting is,
in a nutshell, a generic Hypermedia client supporting a variety of formats
such as HAL, JSON:API, Siren, HTML and others.

While working on more complex frontends with this, it because apparent that
the architecture of Ketting was not exactly condusive to making it easy to
integrate with React.

In particular, React taking a more functional approach to rendering, not
having access to immutable state was a detriment to building components
that were easy to reason about. We're passing lots of objects around, don't
have a way to subscribe to global state changes without bringing in Redux
(which would *also* have been a pain to connect).

So I knew it was time to make major changes to Ketting, but it took a while
to come up with a decent idea. Then one day, I read the following tweet:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Is there an Apollo-like React client for REST APIs that’s doesn’t force me to use graphQL? I like the &lt;Query&gt; components for handling loading / error states</p>&mdash; Paul (Case) Atreides ☠️🤖 (@phalt_) <a href="https://twitter.com/phalt_/status/1221923087844642818?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">January 27, 2020</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script> 

The tweet set me on a path to figure out how Apollo works for GraphQL, and
if it's concepts can retrofitted for REST API's.

8 months later, We're releasing [Ketting][1] v6. It's the first major rewrite
and BC break since 2016. In addition, we're releasing a [react-ketting][2],
which provides bindings for React, mostly modelled after Apollo's react
bindings.

How does it work?
-----------------

If you are familiar with Apollo or React hooks, this is likely going to look
familiar. Here's an example:

Lets assume you have a REST api that has an 'article' endpoint. This returns
something like:

```json
{
  "title": "Hello world",
  "body": "...
}
```

This article is retrieved with `GET`, and updated with `PUT`, this is how
you would display it:

```javascript
import { useResource } from 'react-ketting';


export function Article() {

  const { loading, error, data } = useResource('https://api.example/article/5');

  if (loading) {
    return <div>Loading..</div>;
  }

  if (error) {
    return <div class="error">{error.message}</div>;
  }

  return <article>
    <h1>{data.title}</h1>
    <p>{data.body}</p>
  </article>;

}
```

But what about mutations? Unlike GraphQL, mutations in REST APIs often have
$the same format for `GET` and `PUT`, so sending an updated resource to a
server often just means mutating your 'data' and sending it back.

The following example would allow a user to edit an article and send it back:

```javascript
import { useResource } from 'react-ketting';


export function Article() {

  const { loading, error, data, setData, submit } = 
    useResource('https://api.example/article/5');

  if (loading) {
    return <div>Loading..</div>;
  }

  if (error) {
    return <div class="error">{error.message}</div>;
  }

  const changeTitle = (title) => {
    data.title = title;
    setData(data);
  };
  const changeBody = (body) => {
    data.body = body;
    setData(data);
  };

  return <form onsubmit={() => submit}>
    <input type="text" value={data.title} onChange={ev => changeTitle(ev.target.value)  />
    <textarea onChange={ev => changeBody(ev.target.value)}>{data.body}</textarea>
    <button type="submit">Save!</button>
  </form>;

}
```

Whenever `setData` is called, the internal Ketting cache is updated with the new
resource state. This is globally stored, based on the uri of the resource.

This means that if multiple components use `useResource` on that same uri,
every component will see that update and triggere a re-render.

This is similar to Apollo's local state, except it's still bound to a single
resource uri and can eventually be saved.

When `submit()` is called, the `data` is re-serialized and sent in a `PUT`
request.

All the regular Ketting stuff works in this system, so here's a few other
things you can do:

* You can set this up as `POST` request to create a new resource. After you
  "submitted", subsequent submits will be `PUT` requests.
* If you take advantage of transcluded/embedded resources, getting will
  avoid doing `GET` requests if the resource state was already in the cache.
* You can get access to meta-data related to the request, such as Links,
  `Content-*` headers and also change these for updates.
* If your media-type has some kind of envelope for the actual data, you can
  write custom deserializers that trigger depending on the value of the
  `Content-Type`.
* Use OAuth2, Basic Auth, or your custom authentication system by writing
  an auth middleware.
* If your hypermedia format supports actions/forms, trigger those.
* Handle events such as `delete` or `stale`, the latter triggering whenever
  an unsafe HTTP method used on the resource.

The list goes on, but the general sell is: If you're building a REST API,
and need a decent client hooking into it, Ketting will get you far. The more
best practice hypermedia features your API uses, the more you will be able to
get out of it.

Most of this was focussed on React. We're not building bindings for other
frameworks yet until we have better experience with frameworks and have a
deep understanding of how to build idiomatic bindings, but the infrastructure
is there.


[1]: https://github.com/badgateway/ketting
[2]: https://github.com/badgateway/react-ketting
