---
date: 2006-06-11 03:38:27 UTC
layout: post
slug: 75
title: "PHP Application Structure"
tags:
  - php
  - architecture

---
<p>One of the first things you do when you create a <span>PHP</span> application, is to create a good directory structure.</p>

<p>Many people have their own way of doing things and this is good. The most important thing is that people take the time to think of a good way to do stuff.</p>

<p>Today I'll share mine. I'm not saying this is the best way of doing stuff, this is simply a system that worked well for me.</p>

<p>Here's my main listing:</p>

<ul>
<li>lib/</li>
<li>conf/</li>
<li>resources/</li>
<li>index.php</li>
</ul>
<p>As you can see, I only have 3 directories, each with a specific purpose, and I'm always using a single index.php which handles all the requests.</p>

<h3>lib/</h3>

<p>This is where my class libraries go. All the classes are in a PEAR-structure, this means: 1 class per file, and the file/directory maps exactly to the classname, for example:the class <strong>Services_MetaWebLog</strong> can be found in <strong>lib/Services/MetaWebLog.php</strong></p>

<p>There are a few good reasons why this is a good way to structure your classes:</p>

<ul>
  <li>Many systems already use this structure, so if you need foreign libraries (from PEAR, Solar or whatever) you usually can just copy-paste their classes in your structure</li>
  <li>It allows you to easily find certain classes</li>
  <li>It allows a pretty cool <strong>__autoload()</strong> function</li>
  <li>If you are using subversion, you can easily include other projects libraries with the <strong>svn:externals</strong> keyword</li>
</ul>
<p>This is the `__autoload` function, in case you need it. It's a bit simplified, but you'll get the point.</p>

```php
<?php
function __autoload($classname) {
  require_once 'lib/' . str_replace('_', '/', $classname) . '.php';
}
```

<h3>conf/</h3>

<p>This is where global application configuration goes. In my case its usually a settings.xml with for example the database DSN.</p>

<p>Another tip is to put you apache configuration here. You can easily create a symlink to your /etc/apache2/sites-enabled . This way you can keep your apache configuration near to your applicaton. If you use Apache1, simply do an Include to this file.</p>

<h3>resources/</h3>

<p>
  This is where I put all the static stuff (I guess static would also have been a good name). My sub-directories tend to look like this:
</p>

<ul>
  <li>css/</li>
  <li>templates/</li>
  <li>images/</li>
  <li>js/</li>
  <li>swf/</li>
</ul>

<p>Good luck!</p>
