---
date: 2010-01-07 17:14:05 UTC
layout: post
slug: 261
title: "javascript's escape and encodeURI vs. PHP $_POST"
tags:
  - php
  - javascript
  - escape
  - encodeuri
  - unicode
  - percentencoding
  - urlencode
  - post
  - utf8

---
<p>I just stumbled upon an odd encoding issue with a web application.</p>

<p>Basically, data is coming into our PHP application through a Javascript's <a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/XMLHttpRequest/">XMLHttpRequest (ajax)</a>. The data is sent as a standard form encoding (application/x-www-form-urlencoded), and picked up by PHP using the $_POST array. Any strings in form POST request are 'urlencoded', also known as <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Percent-encoding">Percent-encoding</a>. As an example, this will turn a space into the often-seen %20.</p>

<p>Normally everything in the $_POST and $_GET arrays is already decoded, so when you're dealing with these arrays you don't really have to think about this. This time however, I was dealing with some non-latin unicode characters and for some reason they were never decoded and ended up in de database as raw url-encoded strings.</p>

<p>Doing a bit of research led me to the following: normally any special character is encoded as %XX, X and X being 2 hexadecimal values. These values simply represent bytes. The values I got were different altogether and took the form %uXXXX. I just assumed this was part of standard uri-encoding for unicode characters, so I was still a bit shook-up to see that PHP didn't just pick them up.</p>

<p>After a <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Urlencode#Non-standard_implementations">bit of research</a>, I found out that the unicode representation was rejected by W3c, which is probably also why the PHP authors decided to not implement this. Javascript actually has 2 different methods to do percent-encoding, namely:</p>

<pre>
escape("☢"); // returns %u2622
encodeURI("☢"); // returns %E2%98%A2
</pre>

<p>Guess which one we were using?</p>

<p>Even though the %u syntax is arguably better to represent unicode characters, W3c seems to have voted against the syntax for backwards compatibility reasons. Before this happened the escape method was already adopted in javascript which in turn caused me to stumble upon this problem and write <a href="http://evertpot.com/261">an article</a> about it.</p>

<p>The more you know..</p>
